README update (#473)
garnix-io/garn: README.md

backend`, or both with `garn run startAll`. All without needing to worry about
having the correct version of `go`, `nodejs`, or anything else installed.

You may have noticed the use of import URLs in the file above. This is supported
by Deno, which we use under the hood. But you don't need to install that either.
In fact, **garn** might just be one of the last things you have to manually
install.[^2]

**garn** is powered by [Nix](https://nixos.org/), so you get portable and
reproducible builds and development environments.

---

## Table of contents

- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [Commands](#commands)
- [Core Concepts](#core-concepts)
- [Languages and stacks](#languages-and-stacks)
- [How it works](#how-it-works)
- [Comparison to other tools](#comparison-to-other-tools)
- [Typescript API](#typescript-api)

> -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Getting started

1) **Install garn**:

   ```bash
   sh <(curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://garn.io/install.sh)
   ```

   `garn` needs [`nix`](https://nixos.org/) to be installed, so if you don't
   have nix already the above installer will install nix first, after asking
   for confirmation.

>    <details>

Reviewer: You're using html tags here, which works, but it breaks markdown inside the tags apparently. But you're using that in various places. So e.g. `**garn**` or `[this page](https://...)` doesn't work as expected.

     <summary>Manual install (Optional)</summary>
     If you prefer to know exactly what **garn** is doing, or if you have a
     special setup not covered by our installation script, you can see
     [this page](https://garn.io/docs/getting_started) for manual installation
     steps.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

   </details>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

   <details>
     <summary>Installing shell completion (Optional)</summary>

>      You can also install shell completion scripts for the most popular shells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     You can install shell completion scripts for the most popular shells.
```

     See [this page](https://garn.io/docs/getting_started) for more information.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

   </details>

   <details>
     <summary>Deno LSP for garn files (Optional)</summary>
     <b>garn</b> is much nicer with an IDE-like experience. You can use
     `garn edit` for that or, if you prefer, you can set up your own editor.
     See [this page](https://garn.io/docs/getting_started) for more information.
   </details>

2) **Create your first `garn.ts` file**:

   You can use `garn init` to template out an initial configuration. You can

>    use `garn edit` to start a text editor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   use `garn edit` to start a text editor.
```

### `garn edit`

`garn edit` will start (and, if necessary, download) VSCodium, with Deno LSP
configured for you. It will open `garn.ts` in the current directory. This won't
clobber any of your existing VSCode/VSCodium configuration and data.

## Core concepts

* **Environments** (also known as devshells, devenvs, virtualenvs) are
* **Checks**
* **Packages**
* **Executables**
* **Projects** are

> * **Plugins**

Reviewer: Are you still going to flesh this out more?

## Languages and Stacks

  <img src="./lingua-franca.png">

<br/>
<br/>

We currently have support for the Npm, Yarn, Go, and Haskell projects, with
more languages coming soon. If you really want to see something, make your
voice heard in our issue tracker!

Note also our [examples](https://github.com/garnix-io/garn/tree/main/examples)
directory, which contains tested examples of using **garn** in various ways.

All examples below require the two following imports:

```typescript
import * as garn from "https://garn.io/ts/v0.0.18/mod.ts";
import * as pkgs from "https://garn.io/ts/v0.0.18/nixpkgs.ts";
```

> All `garn.ts` files require the first import, and most often you also need the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All `garn.ts` files require the first import, and often you also need the
```

> second. Besides that, you almost always need nothing else.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
second. Besides that, you rarely need other imports.
```

### Npm

The basic workhorse of Npm projects is `mkNpmProject`. An example:

```typescript
export const frontend = garn.javascript.mkNpmProject({
  description: "My project frontend",
  src: ".",
  nodeVersion: "18",
})
  .withDevTools([pkgs.jq])
  .addExecutable("run", "npm install && npm start")

>   .addCheck("test", "npm install && npm run test");

Reviewer: You could add the prettier plugin here.

```typescript
export const project = garn.haskell.mkHaskellProject({
  description: "My project",
  src: ".",
  executables: ["server", "openapi-generation"]
  ghcVersion: "ghc94"
})
```

Assuming you have a `cabal` file in `.`, this creates a Project containing:

- A reproducible, CI-ready Package (run it with `garn build project`) that
  includes the test-suites of your project.
- Two executables, that run the corresponding executables from the cabal file.
  Run them with `garn run project.server` and `garn run project.openapi-generation`.
- An Environment or devshell you can enter with `garn enter project` with all
  dependencies available.

The right version of `node`, `npm`, `jq`, etc. will be used for all these.
You can see a full project [here](https://github.com/garnix-io/garn/tree/main/examples/npm-project).

## How it works

The essential idea is to generate Nix code corresponding to your projects, and
then run Nix behind the scenes. In [here](https://github.com/garnix-io/garn/blob/main/ts/nix.ts),
you can see the simple but low-level Nix AST we use. Objects such as `Check`s
have a `nixExpression` field that contains their corresponding Nix expression.

> **garn** then generates a `flake.nix` that, for every exported variables of the `garn.ts`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**garn** then generates a `flake.nix` that, for every exported variable of the `garn.ts` file,
```

has a corresponding `package`, `check`, `devshell` or `app`.

This means that **garn** integrates with Nix (and the Nix ecosystem) *both ways*:

> you can write pure Nix expressions in **garn**, and import Nix projects, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can write pure Nix expressions and embed them in `garn.ts` files, or import Nix projects, but
```

you can also from Nix call things generated by **garn**.

## Typescript API

You can find documentation for the **garn** Deno library [here](https://doc.deno.land/https://garn.io/ts/v0.0.18/mod.ts).

## Comparison to other tools

- **Nix**: Nix is a brilliant idea with an immense amount of volunteer effort

>   behind it, and the giant shoulders on which **garn** stands. It has a rather

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  behind it, and the giant's shoulders on which **garn** stands. It has a rather
```

>   complex CLI, and the Nix language is a whole new thing to learn. That said

Reviewer: Maybe mention that nix is also not very accessible and/or has a very steep learning curve?

  it is a much more mature project with support for just about every imaginable

>   stack. For complex projects, you're almost always better off picking Nix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  stack. For complex projects, you might be better off picking Nix right now.
```

  For simpler ones, or ones that include collaborators who don't feel comfortable
  with Nix, **garn** might be a better option.

  But the choice isn't exclusive

>   or binary: **garn** it both allows including

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  or binary: **garn** both allows including
```

>   Nix expressions or dependencies within it, and generates a `flake.nix` that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Nix expressions or dependencies within it, and generates a `flake.nix` file that
```

  In that regard, they overlap with **garn**.
  They are much easier to install and get started with than **garn**. But they
  don't manage packages and environments at all, so every user still needs to
  figure that out themselves. **garn** also makes it easy to share your "recipes"
  as a library. (make also does incremental builds, which **garn** does not.)
- **virtualenv**, **rvm**, **nvm**, etc.: These are *language-specific* tools;
  very helpful if you need a particular python package or version of python,
  not at all if you need a system package.
- **devbox** and **devenv**: Both of these projects are more mature than **garn**;
  you are likely to find fewer rough corners with them.
  Other than that, **garn** differs from them in three major ways: it supports
  writing your own packages and checks which run in isolated environments (such as CI)
  and can be cached or consumed by downstream users; it allows configuration in
  Typescript rather than YAML and/or Nix; and it allows easily writing and importing
  libraries with reusable functionality.
- **docker**: Docker isolates processes, and is often used to distribute dev

>   environments. **garn** overlaps with this feature . Both tools make it relatively certain that if it works once

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  environments. **garn** overlaps with this feature. Both tools make it relatively certain that if it works once
```

  it works everywhere. But with Docker that comes at the price of harder
  integration with your development process.

  Besides development environments, Docker is also used for other purposes, such

>   as deployment. **garn** does not support any of that (yet).

Reviewer: Can we maybe run word-wrapping on these text snippets? The line breaks are a bit erratic. (This doesn't matter for rendered markdown, but for ascii.)
